Ingram Content Group is a United States-based service provider to the book publishing industry based in La Vergne, Tennessee. A subsidiary of Ingram Industries, Ingram Content Group was formed in 2009 as Ingram Lightning Group merged with Ingram Digital Group. Ingram Content Group’s operating units are Ingram Book Company, Ingram International Inc., Ingram Library Services Inc., Ingram Publisher Services Inc., Ingram Periodicals Inc., Ingram Digital, Lightning Source Inc., Spring Arbor Distributors Inc., Tennessee Book Company LLC, and Coutts Information Services Ltd.
They have the industry's largest active book inventory with access to 7.5 million titles. The markets they serve include booksellers, librarians, educators and specialty retailers. Ingram employs approximately 3,000 people worldwide. Ingram participated in the creation of Amazon.com during the late 1990s.
Ingram Content Group is used heavily throughout the United States as a major distributor for independent book stores. Ingram has warehouses in Oregon, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, and Indiana. They also operate a print on demand business under the Lightning Source brand with facilities in Tennessee, Pennsylvania, United Kingdom, France and Australia. The company also provides full service distribution including sales and marketing services via its Ingram Publisher Services division.
In addition to print distribution, Ingram also provides digital content services and distribution through CoreSource, VitalSource, and MyiLibrary.
During 1999 and 2000, Ingram Industries negotiated a sale to Barnes & Noble which was ultimately withdrawn after pressure from independent bookstores and the American Booksellers Association.
The company's daily activities are handled by John R. Ingram who serves as CEO and chairman of Ingram Content Group. He also serves as the Vice Chairman of Ingram Industries.
In June 2014, the company in conjunction with Hachette Book Group USA, and Perseus Books Group, announced a three-way deal whereby Hachette would buy Perseus and then sell that company's client services businesses to Ingram. Financial details of the deal were not disclosed. 


== Notes ==


== See also ==
List of book distributors


== External links ==
Ingram Content Group